Fatigue is a subjective feeling of tiredness which is distinct from weakness, and has a gradual onset. Unlike weakness, fatigue can be alleviated by periods of rest. Fatigue can have physical or mental causes. Physical fatigue is the transient inability of a muscle to maintain optimal physical performance, and is made more severe by intense physical exercise.[1][2][3] Mental fatigue is a transient decrease in maximal cognitive performance resulting from prolonged periods of cognitive activity. It can manifest as somnolence, lethargy, or directed attention fatigue.[4]

Medically, fatigue is a non-specific symptom, which means that it has many possible causes and accompanies many different conditions. Fatigue is considered a symptom, rather than a sign because it is a subjective feeling reported by the patient, rather than an objective one that can be observed by others. Fatigue and 'feelings of fatigue' are often confused.[5]

Physical fatigue
Main article: Muscle fatigue
Physical fatigue, or muscle fatigue, is the temporary physical inability of a muscle to perform optimally. The onset of muscle fatigue during physical activity is gradual, and depends upon an individual's level of physical fitness, and also upon other factors, such as sleep deprivation and overall health. It can be reversed by rest.[6] Physical fatigue can be caused by a lack of energy in the muscle, by a decrease of the efficiency of the neuromuscular junction or by a reduction of the drive originating from the central nervous system.[7] The central component of fatigue is triggered by an increase of the level of serotonin in the central nervous system.[8] During motor activity, serotonin released in synapses that contact motoneurons promotes muscle contraction.[9] During high level of motor activity, the amount of serotonin released increases and a spillover occurs. Serotonin binds to extrasynaptic receptors located on the axon initial segment of motoneurons with the result that nerve impulse initiation and thereby muscle contraction are inhibited.[10]

Muscle strength testing can be used to determine the presence of a neuromuscular disease, but cannot determine its cause. Additional testing, such as electromyography, can provide diagnostic information, but information gained from muscle strength testing alone is not enough to diagnose most neuromuscular disorders.[11]

People with multiple sclerosis experience a form of overwhelming lassitude or tiredness that can occur at any time of the day, for any duration, and that does not necessarily recur in a recognizable pattern for any given patient, referred to as "neurological fatigue".[12][13]

Mental fatigue
Mental fatigue is a temporary inability to maintain optimal cognitive performance. The onset of mental fatigue during any cognitive activity is gradual, and depends upon an individual's cognitive ability, and also upon other factors, such as sleep deprivation and overall health. Mental fatigue has also been shown to decrease physical performance.[4] It can manifest as somnolence, lethargy, or directed attention fatigue. Decreased attention may also be described as a more or less decreased level of consciousness.[14] In any case, this can be dangerous when performing tasks that require constant concentration, such as operating large vehicles. For instance, a person who is sufficiently somnolent may experience microsleep. However, objective cognitive testing can be used to differentiate the neurocognitive deficits of brain disease from those attributable to tiredness.[citation needed]

The perception of mental fatigue is believed to be modulated by the brain's reticular activating system (RAS).[citation needed]

Comparison with sleepiness
Fatigue is generally considered a more long-term condition than sleepiness (somnolence).[15] Although sleepiness can be a symptom of medical issues, it usually results from lack of restful sleep, or a lack of stimulation.[16] Chronic fatigue, on the other hand, is a symptom of a greater medical problem in most cases. It manifests in mental or physical weariness and inability to complete tasks at normal performance.[17] Both are often used interchangeably and even categorized under the description of 'being tired.' Oftentimes fatigue is described as an uncomfortable tiredness, whereas sleepiness is comfortable and inviting.

Causes
Fatigue is a normal result of working, mental stress, overstimulation and understimulation, jet lag or active recreation, depression, boredom, disease and lack of sleep. It may also have chemical causes, such as poisoning, low blood sugar, or mineral or vitamin deficiencies. Chronic blood loss frequently results in fatigue, as do other conditions that cause anemia. Fatigue is different from drowsiness, where a patient feels that sleep is required. Fatigue is a normal response to physical exertion or stress, but can also be a sign of a physical disorder.

Temporary fatigue is likely to be a minor illness like the common cold as one part of the sickness behavior response that happens when the immune system fights an infection.

Chronic fatigue
Prolonged fatigue is a self-reported, persistent (constant) fatigue lasting at least one month. Chronic fatigue is a self-reported fatigue lasting at least six consecutive months. Chronic fatigue may be either persistent or relapsing.[18] Chronic fatigue is a symptom of many diseases and conditions. Some major categories of diseases that feature fatigue include:

Autoimmune diseases such as celiac disease, lupus, multiple sclerosis, myasthenia gravis, Sjögren's syndrome, and spondyloarthropathy
Blood disorders such as anemia and hemochromatosis
Cancer, in which case it is called cancer fatigue
Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS)[19]
Drug abuse including alcohol abuse[19]
Depression and other mental disorders that feature depressed mood
Eating disorders, which can produce fatigue due to inadequate nutrition
Endocrine diseases like diabetes mellitus and hypothyroidism
Fibromyalgia
Gulf War syndrome
Heart disease
HIV
Inborn errors of metabolism such as fructose malabsorption.[20][21]
Infectious diseases such as infectious mononucleosis.
Irritable bowel syndrome
Leukemia or lymphoma
Liver failure
Lyme disease
Neurological disorders such as narcolepsy, Parkinson's disease and post-concussion syndrome
Physical trauma and other pain-causing conditions, such as arthritis
Sleep deprivation or sleep disorders
Spring fever
Stroke
Thyroid diseases
Uremia, which is caused by kidney disease
Fatigue may also be a side effect of certain medications (e.g., lithium salts, ciprofloxacin); beta blockers, which can induce exercise intolerance; and many cancer treatments, particularly chemotherapy and radiotherapy.

Diagnosis

Minor dark circles, in addition to a hint of eye bags, a combination which is suggestive of sleep deprivation.
One study concluded about 50% of people who have fatigue receive a diagnosis that could explain the fatigue after a year with the condition. In those people who have a possible diagnosis, musculoskeletal (19.4%) and psychological problems (16.5%) are the most common. Definitive physical conditions were only found in 8.2% of cases.[22]

If a person with fatigue decides to seek medical advice, the overall goal is to identify and rule out any treatable conditions. This is done by considering the person's medical history, any other symptoms that are present, and evaluating of the qualities of the fatigue itself. The affected person may be able to identify patterns to the fatigue, such as being more tired at certain times of day, whether fatigue increases throughout the day, and whether fatigue is reduced after taking a nap.

Because disrupted sleep is a significant contributor to fatigue, a diagnostic evaluation considers the quality of sleep, the emotional state of the person, sleep pattern, and stress level. The amount of sleep, the hours that are set aside for sleep, and the number of times that a person awakens during the night are important. A sleep study may be ordered to rule out a sleep disorder.

Depression and other psychological conditions can produce fatigue, so people who report fatigue are routinely screened for these conditions, along with drug abuse, poor diet, and lack of physical exercise, which paradoxically increases fatigue.

Basic medical tests may be performed to rule out common causes of fatigue. These include blood tests to check for infection or anaemia, a urinalysis to look for signs of liver disease or diabetes mellitus, and other tests to check for kidney and liver function, such as a comprehensive metabolic panel.[23] Other tests may be chosen depending on the patient's social history, such as an HIV test or pregnancy test.

Measurement
Fatigue can be quantitatively measured. Devices to measure medical fatigue have been developed by Japanese companies, among them Nintendo.[24] Nevertheless such devices are not in common use outside Japan.

It's the middle of the day and you just can't seem to get out of first gear. Is it lack of sleep, or could there be something else that makes you feel so wiped out? Check out these culprits for fatigue and get some pep back in your step.

Does Your Lifestyle Need a Tweak?
First off, ask yourself this: Do you treat your body right?

"With my patients, I talk about the three pillars of health: sleep, diet, and exercise," says Theodore Friedman, MD, PhD.

"If you aren't getting good sleep, it's hard to eat well, and it's hard to exercise. And the same is true the other way around. They're all related."

So try not to short-change yourself on shut-eye. Adults need 7 to 9 hours of sleep. Eat a balanced diet of fruits, veggies, and lean protein, and get a regular dose of physical activity.

If you've checked all those boxes and you still drag through your days, it might be time to check possible medical causes of fatigue.

Anemia
It's a disorder that makes it hard for your blood to move oxygen around your body. A common type is called "iron-deficiency" anemia.

Iron acts like a train car that transports oxygen in your blood. "People with low iron don't have enough cars on their train," Friedman says. "They're tired, they get dizzy when they stand up, they get brain fog, they get heart palpitations."

Your doctor can check you for anemia with a simple blood test.

Diabetes
Doctors don't know exactly why it makes people so tired. One likely reason is that your body uses lots of energy to deal with your frequent changes in blood sugar levels.

What doctors do know is that fatigue is one of the most common symptoms of diabetes. It has other signs, too. You may feel thirsty and need to go to the bathroom often.

Problems With Your Thyroid
It's a small, butterfly-shaped gland that sits in your neck. It makes a hormone that helps control how you use energy. When your thyroid gland is out of whack, you're out of whack.

"People with an underactive thyroid are going to feel tired," Friedman says. "Their cells aren't working well, they're sluggish, and their reflexes are slow."

Your doctor may test your blood for thyroid hormone to see if it's to blame for your fatigue.

Heart Disease
Extreme tiredness is a common symptom of congestive heart failure, which happens when it doesn't pump as well as it should. If you have it, your fatigue usually gets worse when you exercise. You might also have swelling in your arms or legs and shortness of breath.

Sleep Apnea
This disorder keeps you from getting enough oxygen when you sleep, which means you won't get real rest during the night.

"The brain notices you're not getting rid of your CO2, and it wakes up really briefly in an alarmed state," says Lisa Shives, MD, director of the Sleep Medicine Center at the University of California, San Diego School of Medicine. You don't even realize it, which makes it hard to figure out why you're so sleepy during the day.

"You don't get into REM -- the sleep that makes you feel best," Shives says.

A device called a continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) machine can help keep your airways open for a solid night's sleep.

Menopause
If you're a woman who's going through menopause, you may find it hard to get good sleep. Your hormones change a lot at this time, which give you night sweats and hot flashes. That can keep you up at night and leave you dragging during the day.

Depression
It robs your brain of the chemicals it needs to work at its best. One of those is serotonin, which helps regulate your internal body clock.

Depression can lower your energy levels and make you feel tired during the day. You may also find it hard to fall asleep at night, or you might wake up earlier than you want in the morning.

Talk to you doctor if you think you're depressed. Talk therapy and medicine can help.

Fatigue (either physical, mental or both) is a symptom that may be difficult for the patient to describe and words like lethargic, exhausted and tired may be used.
Taking a careful and complete history is the key to help making the underlying diagnosis of the cause for the symptom of fatigue. However, in about a third of patients the cause is not found and the diagnosis is not known.
There are numerous causes of fatigue symptoms. Examples of some treatable causes of fatigue include anemia, diabetes,thyroid disease, heart disease, COPD and sleep disorders (Table).
Long lasting complaints of fatigue do not equate to chronic fatigue syndrome. Specific criteria as set by the CDC need to be met to make that particular diagnosis.

Fatigue can be described as the lack of energy and motivation (both physical and mental). This is different than drowsiness, a term that describes the need to sleep. Often a person complains of feeling tired and it is up to the health care professional to distinguish between fatigue and drowsiness, though both can occur at the same time. Aside from drowsiness, other symptoms can be confused with fatigue including shortness of breath with activity and muscle weakness. Again, all these symptoms can occur at the same time. Also, fatigue can be a normal response to physical and mental activity; in most normal individuals it is quickly relieved (usually in hours to about a day, depending on the intensity of the activity) by reducing the activity.

Fatigue is a very common complaint and it is important to remember that it is a symptom and not a disease. Many illnesses can result in the complaint of fatigue and they can be physical, psychological, or a combination of the two.

Often, the symptom of fatigue has a gradual onset and the person may not be aware of how much energy they have lost until they try to compare their ability to complete tasks from one time frame to another. They may presume that their fatigue is due to aging and ignore the symptom. This may lead to a delay in seeking care.

While it is true that depression and other psychiatric issues may be the reason for fatigue, it is reasonable to make certain that there is not an underlying physical illness that is the root cause.

Individuals with fatigue may have three primary complaints; however, it can vary in each person.

There may be lack of motivation or the ability to begin an activity;
the person tires easily once the activity has begun; and
the person has mental fatigue or difficulty with concentration and memory to start or complete an activity.
While fatigue can last for a prolonged period of time, the presence of chronic fatigue is different than chronic fatigue syndrome, which has specific set of two criteria set for by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention as follows:

Have severe chronic fatigue for at least six months or longer with other known medical conditions (whose manifestation includes fatigue) excluded by clinical diagnosis; and
Concurrently have four or more of the following symptoms:
post-exertional malaise
impaired memory or concentration
unrefreshing sleep
muscle pain
multi-joint pain without redness or swelling
tender cervical or axillary lymph nodes
sore throat
headache
Other words that a person might use to describe fatigue may include:

lethargic,
listless,
lack of energy,
tired,
worn out,
weary,
exhausted,
malaise, or
feeling run down.

There are numerous potential causes of fatigue as a major complaint. They range from those that cause poor blood supply to the body's tissues to illnesses that affect metabolism, from infections and inflammatory diseases to those that cause sleep disturbances. Fatigue is a common side effect of many medications. While numerous patients with psychological conditions often complain of fatigue (physical and mental), there are also a group of patients where the cause of fatigue is never diagnosed.

The following table summarizes some common causes of fatigue but is not meant to be comprehensive:

Fatigue is a symptom of an underlying disease and is described in many ways from feeling weak to being constantly tired or lacking energy.

There may be other associated symptoms depending upon the underlying cause.

Individuals with heart disease, lung disease, or anemia may complain of associated shortness of breath or tiring easily with minimal activity.
Persons with diabetes may complain of polyuria (excess urination), polydypsia (excess thirst), or change of vision.
Those who have hypothyroidism may also have symptoms of feeling cold, dry skin and brittle hair.
It is important that the health care professional consider the complaint of fatigue in the context of the whole patient to try to come to an accurate causative diagnosis.

The key to finding the cause of fatigue in a patient is the care the health care professional takes in compiling a medical history. It is important to ask questions not only about the loss of energy but also about other potential problems that the patient may be experiencing such as shortness of breath, sleep patterns, hair loss, color of the stools, or any of the myriad of questions that might provide information as to what organ system may be involved.

Usually, a history is taken by the health care professional asking questions about the quality and quantity of fatigue. Examples of some of the questions the health care professional may ask include:

Does the patient feel well in the morning when they wake?
Does the fatigue progress through the day?
Does the person nap unexpectedly or take excessive amounts of stimulants such as caffeine to complete daily activities?
Does the fatigue come on gradually or abruptly?
Is it a daily occurrence or intermittent/periodic?
What makes it better and what makes it worse?
How has the patient's life changed because of the fatigue?
Is the fatigue more mental than physical?
Other associated symptoms with fatigue include:

weight loss,
chest pain and shortness of breath,
vomiting and diarrhea,
fevers and chills,
muscle weakness or pain, and/or
anxiety and depression.
It is also appropriate for the health care professional to ask questions about the patient's social situation and to also ask about their psychologic state of mind. Alcohol and drug abuse screening questions should be expected as routine.

Because fatigue is such a non-specific symptom, each answer may direct the health care professional to explore a different potential cause.

A full physical examination is important to look for underlying signs of illness. The general appearance of the patient is important looking for hygiene, vital signs, and evidence of anxiety or agitation. Examination and evaluation of the different systems of the body (heart, lungs, abdomen, neurological system, etc.) and combining any abnormal findings with the clues found in the history taking may help make the diagnosis.

Special attention may be taken to palpate (feel) for an abnormal thyroid gland, swollen lymph nodes, listen for abnormal heart sounds including murmurs and to check for normal muscle tone and reflexes.

Depending on the findings in the history and physical examination, blood tests and other imaging studies may be ordered. Initial screening blood tests may include:

CBC (complete blood count that includes a red blood cell, white blood cell and platelet count);
electrolytes (sodium potassium, chloride, carbon dioxide, and sometimes calcium and magnesium);
glucose (blood sugar);
BUN/creatinine (to measure kidney function);
TSH or thyroid stimulating hormone;
monospot;
ferritin;
tests for deficiencies in vitamins B12, D, folic acid, and iron;
CPK (elevated in illnesses that cause muscle inflammation); and/or
ESR or erythrocyte sedimentation rate (non specific blood marker for inflammation in the body).
CPK and ESR screening tests are rarely done initially. The decision to obtain X-rays, CT scans, electrocardiogram (ECG, EKG) and other imaging or testing will depend upon the individual patient's circumstances and what the health care practitioner suspects may be the underlying cause of the fatigue.



Since fatigue is a symptom of an underlying condition, the treatment depends upon the condition that is causing the fatigue, regardless of whether it is physical, psychological or a combination of the two.

There may be a lag time between when the illness has been treated and the intensity of fatigue symptoms; some symptoms may resolve as soon as the underlying condition is treated. For example, individuals who are anemic feel much better as soon as their red blood cell count increases, while those recovering from infectious mononucleosis may require weeks to have their energy levels return to normal.

Fatigue as a symptom can occur as the result of many causes and therefore, prevention is not an issue. More importantly, the early recognition of fatigue will allow a person to seek medical care and potentially have an earlier diagnosis of the underlying cause made.

Sometimes, symptoms like fatigue arise gradually and it is difficult for the person to realize that there is a problem. It may take an outside perspective from a friend or family member to appreciate a difference in function. Self-awareness of gradual decline in body performance is often difficult as a person makes repeated small accommodations to complete daily activities.


