Nausea is a sensation of unease and discomfort in the upper stomach with an involuntary urge to vomit.[1] It may precede vomiting, but a person can have nausea without vomiting. When prolonged, it is a debilitating symptom.[2]

Nausea is a non-specific symptom, which means that it has many possible causes. Some common causes of nausea are motion sickness, dizziness, migraine, fainting, low blood sugar, gastroenteritis (stomach infection) or food poisoning. Nausea is a side effect of many medications including chemotherapy, or morning sickness in early pregnancy. Nausea may also be caused by anxiety, disgust and depression.[3][4][5]

Medications taken to prevent and treat nausea are called antiemetics. The most commonly prescribed antiemetics in the US are promethazine, metoclopramide and ondansetron. The word nausea is from Latin nausea, from Greek ναυσία – nausia,[6] "ναυτία" – nautia, motion sickness, "feeling sick or queasy".[7]

Gastrointestinal infections (37%) and food poisoning are the two most common causes of acute nausea and vomiting.[1] Side effects from medications (3%) and pregnancy are also relatively frequent.[1] There are many causes of chronic nausea.[1] Nausea and vomiting remain undiagnosed in 10% of the cases, with rates about 6% in children and more than 16% in people aged more than 65 years.[8]

Gastrointestinal
Gastrointestinal infection is one of the most common causes of acute nausea and vomiting.[1] Chronic nausea may be the presentation of many gastrointestinal disorders, occasionally as the major symptom, such as gastroesophageal reflux disease, functional dyspepsia, gastroparesis, peptic ulcer, celiac disease, non-celiac gluten sensitivity, Crohn's disease, hepatitis, upper gastrointestinal malignancy, and pancreatic cancer.[1][9] Uncomplicated Helicobacter pylori infection does not cause chronic nausea.[1]

Food poisoning
Food poisoning usually causes an abrupt onset of nausea and vomiting one to six hours after ingestion of contaminated food and lasts for one to two days.[10] It is due to toxins produced by bacteria in food.[10]

Medications
Many medications can potentially cause nausea.[10] Some of the most frequently associated include cytotoxic chemotherapy regimens for cancer and other diseases, and general anaesthetic agents.

Pregnancy
Nausea or "morning sickness" is common during early pregnancy but may occasionally continue into the second and third trimesters. In the first trimester nearly 80% of women have some degree of nausea.[11] Pregnancy should therefore be considered as a possible cause of nausea in any women of child bearing age.[10] While usually it is mild and self-limiting, severe cases known as hyperemesis gravidarum may require treatment.[12]

Disequilibrium
A number of conditions involving balance such as motion sickness and vertigo can lead to nausea and vomiting.

Psychiatric
Nausea may be caused by depression, anxiety disorders and eating disorders.[13]

Potentially serious
While most causes of nausea are not serious, some serious conditions are associated with nausea. These include: pancreatitis, small bowel obstruction, appendicitis, cholecystitis, hepatitis, Addisonian crisis, diabetic ketoacidosis, increased intracranial pressure, brain tumors, meningitis, heart attack,[14] carbon monoxide poisoning and many others.[1]

Comprehensive list
Inside the abdomen
Obstructing disorders

Pyloric obstruction
Small bowel obstruction
Colonic obstruction
Superior mesenteric artery syndrome
Enteric infections

Viral infection
Bacterial infection
Inflammatory diseases

Cholecystitis
Pancreatitis
Appendicitis
Hepatitis
Sensorimotor dysfunction

Gastroparesis
Intestinal pseudo-obstruction
Gastroesophageal reflux disease
Chronic idiopathic nausea
Functional vomiting
Cyclic vomiting syndrome
Rumination syndrome
Other

Biliary colic
Abdominal irradiation[15]
Outside the abdomen
Cardiopulmonary

Cardiomyopathy
Myocardial infarction (heart attack)
Inner-ear diseases

Motion sickness
Labyrinthitis
Malignancy
Intracerebral disorders

Malignancy
Hemorrhage
Abscess
Hydrocephalus
Psychiatric illnesses

Anorexia and bulimia nervosa
Depression
Other

Post-operative vomiting[15]
Medications and metabolic disorders
Drugs

Chemotherapy
Antibiotics
Antiarrhythmics
Digoxin
Oral hypoglycemic medications
Oral contraceptives
Endocrine/metabolic disease

Pregnancy
Uremia
Ketoacidosis
Thyroid and parathyroid disease
Adrenal insufficiency
Toxins

Liver failure
Alcohol
Diagnostic approach
Patient history
Taking a thorough patient history may reveal important clues to the cause of nausea and vomiting. If the patient's symptoms have an acute onset, then drugs, toxins, and infections are likely. In contrast, a long-standing history of nausea will point towards a chronic illness as the culprit. The timing of nausea and vomiting after eating food is an important factor to pay attention to. Symptoms that occur within an hour of eating may indicate an obstruction proximal to the small intestine, such as gastroparesis or pyloric stenosis. An obstruction further down in the intestine or colon will cause delayed vomiting. An infectious cause of nausea and vomiting such as gastroenteritis may present several hours to days after the food was ingested.[15] The contents of the emesis is a valuable clue towards determining the cause. Bits of fecal matter in the emesis indicate obstruction in the distal intestine or the colon. Emesis that is of a bilious nature (greenish in color) localizes the obstruction to a point past the stomach. Emesis of undigested food points to an obstruction prior to the gastric outlet, such as achalasia or Zenker's diverticulum. If patient experiences reduced abdominal pain after vomiting, then obstruction is a likely etiology. However, vomiting does not relieve the pain brought on by pancreatitis or cholecystitis.[15]

Physical exam
It is important to watch out for signs of dehydration, such as orthostatic hypotension and loss of skin turgor. Auscultation of the abdomen can produce several clues to the cause of nausea and vomiting. A high-pitched tinkling sound indicates possible bowel obstruction, while a splashing "succussion" sound is more indicative of gastric outlet obstruction. Eliciting pain on the abdominal exam when pressing on the patient may indicate an inflammatory process. Signs such as papilledema, visual field losses, or focal neurological deficits are red flag signs for elevated intracranial pressure.[15]

Diagnostic testing
When a history and physical exam are not enough to determine the cause of nausea and vomiting, certain diagnostic tests may prove useful. A chemistry panel would be useful for electrolyte and metabolic abnormalities.[16] Liver function tests and lipase would identify pancreaticobiliary diseases. [16] Abdominal X-rays showing air-fluid levels indicate bowel obstruction, while an X-ray showing air-filled bowel loops are more indicative of ileus. More advanced imaging and procedures may be necessary, such as a CT scan, upper endoscopy, colonoscopy, barium enema, or MRI. Abnormal GI motility can be assessed using specific tests like gastric scintigraphy, wireless motility capsules, and small-intestinal manometry.[15]

Pathophysiology
Research on nausea and vomiting has relied on using animal models to mimic the anatomy and neuropharmacologic features of the human body.[17] The physiologic mechanism of nausea is a complex process that has yet to be fully elucidated. There are four general pathways that are activated by specific triggers in the human body that go on to create the sensation of nausea and vomiting.[18]

Central nervous system (CNS): Stimuli can affect areas of the CNS including the cerebral cortex and the limbic system. These areas are activated by elevated intracranial pressure, irritation of the meninges (i.e. blood or infection), and extreme emotional triggers such as anxiety.
Chemoreceptor trigger zone (CTZ): The CTZ is located in the area postrema in the floor of the fourth ventricle within the brain. This area is outside the blood brain barrier, and is therefore readily exposed to substances circulating through the blood and cerebral spinal fluid. Common triggers of the CTZ include metabolic abnormalities, toxins, and medications. Activation of the CTZ is mediated by dopamine (D2) receptors, serotonin (5HT3) receptors, and neurokinin receptors (NK1).
Vestibular system: This system is activated by disturbances to the vestibular apparatus in the inner ear. These include movements that cause motion sickness and dizziness. This pathway is triggered via histamine (H1) receptors and acetylcholine (ACh) receptors.
Peripheral Pathways: These pathways are triggered via chemoreceptors and mechanoreceptors in the gastrointestinal tract, as well as other organs such as the heart and kidneys. Common activators of these pathways include toxins present in the gastrointestinal lumen and distension of the gastrointestinal lumen from blockage or dysmotility of the bowels. Signals from these pathways travel via multiple neural tracts including the vagus, glossopharyngeal, splanchnic, and sympathetic nerves.
Signals from any of these pathways then travel to the brainstem, activating several structures including the nucleus of the solitary tract, the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus, and central pattern generator.[19] These structures go on to signal various downstream effects of nausea and vomiting. The body's motor muscle responses involve halting the muscles of the gastrointestinal tract, and in fact causing reversed propulsion of gastric contents towards the mouth while increasing abdominal muscle contraction. Autonomic effects involve increased salivation and the sensation of feeling faint that often occurs with nausea and vomiting.

Treatment
If dehydration is present due to loss of fluids from severe vomiting, rehydration with oral electrolyte solutions is preferred.[1] If this is not effective or possible, intravenous rehydration may be required.[1] Medical care is recommended if: a person cannot keep any liquids down, has symptoms more than 2 days, is weak, has a fever, has stomach pain, vomits more than two times in a day or does not urinate for more than 8 hours.[20]

Medications
Many pharmacologic medications are available for the treatment of nausea. There is no medication that is clearly superior to other medications for all cases of nausea.[21] The choice of antiemetic medication may be based on the situation during which the person experiences nausea. For people with motion sickness and vertigo, antihistamines and anticholinergics such as meclizine and scopolamine are particularly effective.[22] Nausea and vomiting associated with migraine headaches respond best to dopamine antagonists such as metoclopramide, prochlorperazine, and chlorpromazine.[22] In cases of gastroenteritis, serotonin antagonists such as ondansetron were found to suppress nausea and vomiting, as well as reduce the need for IV fluid resuscitation.[22] The combination of pyridoxine and doxylamine is the first line treatment for pregnancy-related nausea and vomiting.[22] Dimenhydrinate is an inexpensive and effective over the counter medication for preventing postoperative nausea and vomiting.[23] Other factors to consider when choosing an antiemetic medication include the person's preference, side-effect profile, and cost.

Alternative medicine
In certain people, cannabinoids may be effective in reducing chemotherapy associated nausea and vomiting.[24][25] Several studies have demonstrated the therapeutic effects of cannabinoids for nausea and vomiting in the advanced stages of illnesses such as cancer and AIDS.[26][27]

In hospital settings topical anti-nausea gels are not indicated because of lack of research backing their efficacy.[28] Topical gels containing lorazepam, diphenhydramine, and haloperidol are sometimes used for nausea but are not equivalent to more established therapies.[28]

Ginger has also been shown to be potentially effective in treating several types of nausea.[29][30]

Tentative evidence supports acupuncture at point PC6.[31]

Prognosis
The outlook depends on the cause. Most people recover within few hours or a day. While short-term nausea and vomiting are generally harmless, they may sometimes indicate a more serious condition. When associated with prolonged vomiting, it may lead to dehydration or dangerous electrolyte imbalances or both. Repeated intentional vomiting, characteristic of bulimia, can cause stomach acid to wear away at the enamel in teeth.[32]

Epidemiology
Nausea and or vomiting is the main complaint in 1.6% of visits to family physicians in Australia.[8] However, only 25% of people with nausea visit their family physician.[1] In Australia, nausea, as opposed to vomiting, occurs most frequently in persons aged 15–24 years, and is less common in other age groups.[8]

Nausea is an uneasiness of the stomach that often comes before vomiting. Vomiting is the forcible voluntary or involuntary emptying ("throwing up") of stomach contents through the mouth.

What Causes Nausea or Vomiting?
Nausea and vomiting are not diseases, but they are symptoms of many conditions such as:

Motion sickness or seasickness
Early stages of pregnancy (nausea occurs in approximately 50%-90% of all pregnancies; vomiting in 25%-55%)
Medication-induced vomiting
Intense pain
Emotional stress (such as fear)
Gallbladder disease
Food poisoning
Infections (such as the "stomach flu")
Overeating
A reaction to certain smells or odors
Heart attack
Concussion or brain injury
Brain tumor
Ulcers
Some forms of cancer
Bulimia or other psychological illnesses
Gastroparesis or slow stomach emptying (a condition that can be seen in people with diabetes)
Ingestion of toxins or excessive amounts of alcohol
The causes of vomiting differ according to age. For children, it is common for vomiting to occur from a viral infection, food poisoning, milk allergy, motion sickness, overeating or feeding, coughing, or blocked intestines and illnesses in which the child has a high fever.

The timing of the nausea or vomiting can indicate the cause. When appearing shortly after a meal, nausea or vomiting may be caused by food poisoning, gastritis (inflammation of the stomach lining), an ulcer, or bulimia. Nausea or vomiting one to eight hours after a meal may also indicate food poisoning. However, certain food- borne bacteria, such as salmonella, can take longer to produce symptoms.

Is Vomiting Harmful?
Usually, vomiting is harmless, but it can be a sign of a more serious illness. Some examples of serious conditions that may result in nausea or vomiting include concussions, meningitis (infection of the membrane linings of the brain), intestinal blockage, appendicitis, and brain tumors.

Another concern is dehydration. Adults have a lower risk of becoming dehydrated, because they can usually detect the symptoms of dehydration (such as increased thirst and dry lips or mouth). But young children have a greater risk of becoming dehydrated, especially if they also have diarrhea, because they often are unable to communicate symptoms of dehydration. Adults caring for sick children need to be aware of these visible signs of dehydration: dry lips and mouth, sunken eyes, and rapid breathing or pulse. In infants, also watch for decreased urination and a sunken fontanelle (soft spot on top of the baby's head).

Recurrent vomiting in pregnancy can lead to a serious condition called hyperemesis gravidarum in which the mother may develop fluid and mineral imbalances that can endanger her life or that of her unborn child.

Rarely, excessive vomiting can tear the lining of the esophagus, also known as a Mallory-Weiss tear. If the esophagus is ruptured, this is called Boerhaave's syndrome, and is a medical emergency.

When to Call the Doctor About Nausea and Vomiting
Call a doctor about nausea and vomiting:

If the nausea lasts for more than a few days or if there is a possibility of being pregnant
If home treatment is not working, dehydration is present, or a known injury has occurred (such as head injury or infection) that may be causing the vomiting
Adults should consult a doctor if vomiting occurs for more than one day, diarrhea and vomiting last more than 24 hours, or there are signs of dehydration.
Take an infant or child under six years to the doctor if vomiting lasts more than a few hours, diarrhea is present, signs of dehydration occur, there is a fever, or if the child hasn't urinated for 4-6 hours.
Take a child over age six years to the doctor if vomiting lasts one day, diarrhea combined with vomiting lasts for more than 24 hours, there are any signs of dehydration, there is a fever higher than 101 degrees, or the child hasn't urinated for six hours.
You should seek immediate medical care if any of the following situations occur with vomiting:

There is blood in the vomit (bright red or "coffee grounds" in appearance)
Severe headache or stiff neck
Lethargy, confusion, or a decreased alertness
Severe abdominal pain
Diarrhea
Rapid breathing or pulse
How Is Vomiting Treated?
Treatment for vomiting (regardless of age or cause) includes:

Drinking gradually larger amounts of clear liquids
Avoiding solid food until the vomiting episode has passed
If vomiting and diarrhea last more than 24 hours, an oral rehydrating solution such as Pedialyte should be used to prevent and treat dehydration.
Pregnant women experiencing morning sickness can eat some crackers before getting out of bed or eat a high protein snack before going to bed (lean meat or cheese).
Vomiting associated with cancer treatments can often be treated with another type of drug therapy. There are also prescription and nonprescription drugs that can be used to control vomiting associated with pregnancy, motion sickness, and some forms of dizziness. However, consult with a doctor before using any of these treatments.
How Can I Prevent Nausea?
There are several ways to try and prevent nausea from developing:

Eat small meals throughout the day instead of three large meals.
Eat slowly.
Avoid hard-to-digest foods.
Consume foods that are cold or room temperature if you nauseated by the smell of hot or warm foods.
Rest after eating with your head elevated about 12 inches above your feet.
Drink liquids between meals rather than during meals.
Try to eat when you feel less nauseated.
How Do I Prevent Vomiting Once I Feel Nauseated?
When you begin to feel nauseated, you may be able to prevent vomiting by:

Drinking small amounts of clear, sweetened liquids such as soda or fruit juices (except orange and grapefruit juices, because these are too acidic)
Resting either in a sitting position or in a propped lying position; activity may worsen nausea and may lead to vomiting.
To prevent nausea and vomiting in children:

To treat motion sickness in a car, seat your child so he or she faces the front windshield (watching fast movement out the side windows can make the nausea worse). Also, reading or playing video games in the car could cause motion sickness.
Don't let kids eat and play at the same time.


Nausea and vomiting are symptoms of a disease or condition. Examples include:
Stomach flu (gastroenteritis)
Food poisoning
Pregnancy
Acute gastritis
Pancreatitis
Appendicitis
Brain tumors
Stomach problems
Medications
Peptic ulcers
GERD
It is important to control nausea, vomiting, and any other associated symptoms both for comfort's sake and to prevent dehydration since dehydration can worsen your nausea and vomiting.
The cause of your nausea and vomiting, and any other associated symptoms, for example, a medication, disease, or condition, food, should be identified and treated.
Generally, non-serious causes of nausea and vomiting can be relieved with OTC (over-the-counter) medicine (medication that is available with out a prescription from your doctor), or if known, discontinuing the offending product.
More severe cases of nausea and vomiting may require medical treatment.
Remember, never stop taking your prescription drugs without talking with your doctor or health care professional first.

Nausea and vomiting are symptoms of an underlying illness and due to a not a specific disease. Nausea is the sensation that the stomach wants to empty itself, while vomiting (emesis) or throwing up, is the act of forcible emptying of the stomach. The term "dry heaves" (retching) refers to an episode of vomiting where there is no food in the stomach to vomit, and only small amounts of clear secretions are vomited.

Vomiting is a violent act in which the stomach, the esophagus, stomach, and small intestine forcibly expel contents of the stomach (and sometimes the small intestine) in a coordinated fashion.

There are numerous causes of nausea and vomiting. These symptoms may be due to:

Acute gastritis (direct irritation of the stomach lining)
Central causes in which signals from the vomiting center in the brain cause nausea and vomiting
Other illnesses not due to stomach problems, for example, brain tumors, pancreatitis, and appendicitis
Medications, medical treatments, and illicit or illegal drugs, drug or alcohol overdose
Mechanical obstruction of the bowel

Throat and stomach irritants that cause nausea and vomiting
Acute gastritis or esophagitis often caused by something that irritates the lining of the stomach or throat. Examples include:

Infections: Infections are often the cause of stomach irritation, whether it is a common virus or another type of infection. There may be associated crampy upper abdominal pain that is associated with the nausea and vomiting. Fever ,and chills may be present. Common viral infections include noroviruses and rotavirus. Infection by bacteria in the Helicobacter family (such as H. Pylori) can also be the infectious agent.
Stomach flu: Stomach flu (gastroenteritis) is when vomiting and diarrhea occur together and is associated with a viral infectio that is outside of the stomach. It should not be confused with the flu (influenza), a viral infection with symptoms include fever, chills, cough, and muscle pain.
Food poisoning: Food poisoning may cause significant vomiting, and the most common cause is a toxin released by the bacteria Staphylococcus aureus. Symptoms of food poisoning begin within a couple hours of eating contaminated or poorly prepared food. Other bacterial causes of food poisoning include Salmonella, Campylobacter, Shigella, E. coli, Listeria, or Clostridium botulinum (botulism).
Other stomach irritants: alcohol, smoking, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDs) such as aspirin and ibuprofen may irritate the stomach lining and cause nausea and vomiting.
Peptic ulcer disease: Peptic ulcer disease can range from mild irritation of the stomach lining to the formation of a defect in the protective lining of the stomach called an ulcer.
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD, reflux esophagitis): Nausea or vomiting is also associated with GERD (acid from the stomach is refluxed into the esophagus).

Nausea and Vomiting Symptoms
Other signs and symptoms that may be associated with nausea and vomiting include the following:

Headache
Lightheadedness
Dizziness
A general feeling of being sick to one's stomach
Some people may experience the following related nausea and vomiting symptoms and signs:

Stomach Cramps
Abdominal Pain
Diarrhea

Nausea and vomiting caused by neurological conditions
Headache: especially migraine, is commonly associated with nausea and vomiting.
Inner ear: Motion sickness, labyrinthitis, benign positional vertigo, or Meniere's disease
Increased intracranial pressure: Any illness or injury that increases the pressure within the skull can cause vomiting.
Brain swelling due to trauma (includes bleeding within the brain)
Infection (meningitis or encephalitis)
Tumors (benign or malignant)
Abnormal electrolyte concentrations in the bloodstream and associated water imbalance
Concussion, patients with head injuries do not have to have detectable bleeding in the brain or brain swelling to have symptoms of brain irritation, which can include headache, nausea, vomiting, changes in vision, confusion, difficulty concentrating, and difficulty sleeping.
Noxious stimulae: Certain smells or sounds can cause nausea and vomiting that originates in the brain. Whether it is the pain of a broken bone or the emotional shock of observing an event, vasovagal events can cause significant symptoms. In a vasovagal episode, the vagus nerve (one of the nerves that helps control basic body functions like heart rate, breathing, and blood pressure) is overly stimulated and can cause the heart rate to slow and blood vessels to dilate. This decreases the flow of blood to the brain and can cause fainting (syncope).
Heat related illness: For example heat exhaustion, extreme sunburn, or dehydration
Other diseases and conditions that cause nausea and vomiting
Diabetes: Persons with diabetes may develop nausea because of gastroparesis, a condition in which the stomach fails to empty properly and is likely due to the generalized neuropathy (failure of the nerves in the body to send proper signals to and from the brain or regeneration of nerves in the stomach) that is a complication of the disease.
People with diabetes can also develop nausea and vomiting should their blood sugars become abnormally high or low (hyperglycemia or hypoglycemia) because the sugar and insulin balance is disturbed.

Diseases, illness, or conditions: Many illnesses associated with the intra-abdominal organs can produce the symptoms of nausea and vomiting. These include digestive organ disease ssuch as:
Hepatitis
Gallbladder disease
Pancreatitis
Crohn's disease
Kidney diseases (for example, kidney stones, infection, kidney failure)
Some forms of cancer
Appendicitis
Abdominal adhesions. Abdominal pain and distention, nausea and vomiting, and inability to pass flatus (gas) or have a bowel movement are symptoms of intestinal (bowel obstruction). Common causes of bowel obstruction include previous surgery with the formation of adhesions, hernias, abnormal twisting of the GI tract, tumors, and inflammatory bowel disease, or IBD (ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease..
Vomiting as an atypical symptom of another disease: Some additional illnesses will cause nausea and vomiting, even though there is no direct involvement of the stomach or gastrointestinal tract.
Heart attack victims may experience nausea and vomiting as an atypical symptom of angina, especially if the heart attack affects the inferior or lower part of the heart.
Lung infections, for example, pneumonia and bronchitis, may also cause nausea and vomiting, especially if the area of lung involved is near the diaphragm, the muscle that separates the chest form the abdomen.
Sepsis: An overwhelming body infection spread through the bloodstream may also be associated with nausea and vomiting.
Eating disorders: Patients with bulimia will have self-induced vomiting, purging as part of their psychiatric illness

Side effects from medications: The side effect of many medications include stomach irritation and/or nausea and vomiting. Anti-cancer drugs used for chemotherapy commonly cause nausea and vomiting that is not easily relieved. Narcotic pain medications, anti-inflammatory medications, steroids, and antibiotics all have nausea and vomiting listed as common side effects.
Radiation therapy: Nausea and vomiting can be associated with radiation therapy.
Chemotherapy for cancer



Vomiting in pregnancy is especially common in the first trimester due to hormone level changes in the bloodstream.


Vomiting in infants
It may be hard to decide if an infant is vomiting or spitting up. If the episodes occur shortly after feeding and only a small amount comes up, this may be spitting up.

Forceful vomiting: In the first two or three months, if the vomiting is forceful after eating (imagine it flying across the room), this may be a sign of pyloric stenosis, or an abnormal narrowing of the pylorus, the location where the stomach empties into the duodenum (the first part of the small intestine). The vomiting is impressive and is described as projectile. The diagnosis is often made by history and physical examination, confirmed by ultrasound. The treatment is surgery.
Vomiting associated with pain: if the infant cries uncontrollably, and if the stool is bloody or red, the diagnosis may be an intussusception (the pushing of one segment of the bowel into an adjacent segment). The stool is classically described as currant jelly, but any blood in the stool is not normal and should always be a cause for concern. It is reasonable to seek medical care for any inconsolable infant.
Viral infection: If there is vomiting with associated diarrhea that is not bloody, then a viral infection is a possibility. Alternatively, there may be an issue with intolerance to the type of baby formula. Infants and children are at greater risk of dehydration if the vomiting episodes last for more than 24 hours. If dehydration is suspected, seek medical care. Signs and symptoms of dehydration in an infant include dry mouth, lack of sweat in the armpits and groin, sunken eyes, weakness with a poor cry, and decreased muscle tone.

How do doctors diagnose the cause of nausea and vomiting?
Diagnosis often can be made when the health care professional takes a careful history and performs a physical examination. Any tests that need to be ordered will be based on the information from the history and physical exam, and sometimes no further testing is required to make the diagnosis.

Laboratory tests and X-rays may be ordered to assess the stability of the patient and not necessarily to make the diagnosis. For example, a patient with food poisoning may need blood tests ordered to measure the electrolytes(minerals) and other chemicals, since the patient may lose significant amounts of sodium, potassium, and chloride from the body from persistent vomiting and diarrhea.

Urinalysis may be helpful in assessing hydration status. Concentrated, dark urine is associated with dehydration because the kidneys try to preserve as much water as possible in the body. Ketones in the urine are also a sign of dehydration.

is important to rest the stomach and yet still avoid dehydration. Clear fluids should be attempted for the first 24 hours of an illness, and then the diet should be advanced as tolerated.

Clear fluids are easy for the stomach to absorb and include:

Water
Sports drinks
Clear broths
Popsicles
Jello
It is important not to take too much fluid at one time since stretching the stomach theoretically may cause the nausea to worsen. One to two ounces of fluid at a time, taken every 10-15 minutes, may be all that the stomach will be able to tolerate. In infants and children, the amount may be as little as 5 or 10 cc's or less than a third of an ounce at a time.

Milk products should be avoided for the first 24-48 hours during an episode of nausea and vomiting. If the infection involves the small intestine, the enzyme that helps digest milk is located in cells lining the small intestine can become depleted. This can reduce the tolerance to milk and milk-containing products and lead to, bloating, vomiting, and diarrhea. As the affected individual begins to feel better, they can begin to reintroduce foods, but to help the stomach readjust, health care professionals often recommend limiting the diet to bland foods such as bananas, applesauce, rice, toast (the BRAT diet).


What is the medical treatment for nausea or vomiting?
Nausea and vomiting can be treated with medication at the same time as the search for the underlying diagnosis is being carried out. Ideally, these symptoms should resolve when the underlying illness is treated and controlled.

Nausea and vomiting are often made worse when you are dehydrated, resulting in a vicious cycle. The nausea makes it difficult to drink fluid, making the dehydration worse, which then increases the nausea. Intravenous fluids may be provided to correct this issue and break the cycle.

There are a variety of anti-nausea medications (antiemetics) that your doctor may prescribe. These drugs can be administered in different ways depending upon the your ability to take them. Medications are available by pill, liquid, or tablets that dissolve on or under the tongue, by intravenous or intramuscular injection, or by rectal suppository.

Common medications used to control nausea and vomiting include:

promethazine (Phenergan),
prochlorperazine (Compazine),
droperidol (Inapsine)
metoclopramide (Reglan), and
ondansetron (Zofran).
The decision as to which medication to use will depend on the patient's condition.


When should I call the doctor if I have nausea and vomiting?
If the symptoms last for more than 24 hours, if the diagnosis is uncertain, if there is concern about dehydration, or if the patient has underlying medical conditions that make them more fragile, medical care should be accessed sooner, rather than later.

Infants and children are more susceptible to dehydration and may not have as much reserve as an adult. If there is concern about dehydration or the inability to tolerate fluids, a health care professional should be contacted.

If nausea and vomiting are associated with pain, fever, vomiting blood, or having bloody or black, tarry bowel movements, medical care should be sought immediately.

Vomiting is a symptom of an illness, if the symptom persists for more than 24-48 hours, it may be wise to contact a health care professional.


