A rash is a change of the human skin which affects its color, appearance, or texture.

A rash may be localized in one part of the body, or affect all the skin. Rashes may cause the skin to change color, itch, become warm, bumpy, chapped, dry, cracked or blistered, swell, and may be painful. The causes, and therefore treatments for rashes, vary widely. Diagnosis must take into account such things as the appearance of the rash, other symptoms, what the patient may have been exposed to, occupation, and occurrence in family members. Rash can last 5 to 20 days, the diagnosis may confirm any number of conditions. The presence of a rash may aid diagnosis; associated signs and symptoms are diagnostic of certain diseases. For example, the rash in measles is an erythematous, morbilliform, maculopapular rash that begins a few days after the fever starts. It classically starts at the head, and spreads downwards.

Common causes of rashes include:

Food allergy
Medication side effects[1][2]
Anxiety
Allergies, for example to food, dyes, medicines, insect stings, metals such as zinc or nickel; such rashes are often called hives.
Skin contact with an irritant
Fungal infection, such as ringworm
Balsam of Peru[3]
Reaction to vaccination
Skin diseases such as eczema or acne
Exposure to sun (sunburn) or heat
Friction due to chafing of the skin
Irritation such as caused by abrasives impregnated in clothing rubbing the skin. The cloth itself may be abrasive enough for some people
Secondary syphilis
Poor personal hygiene
Uncommon causes:

Autoimmune disorders such as psoriasis
Lead poisoning
Pregnancy
Repeated scratching on a particular spot
Lyme Disease
Scarlet fever


Skin disease	Symptoms	Usual area of body
Acne vulgaris	Comedones, papules, pustules and nodules.	Face, chest and back.
Acne rosacea	Flushed appearance or redness.	Cheeks, chin, forehead or nose.
Boil	Painful red bump or a cluster of painful red bumps	Anywhere
Cellulitis	Red, tender and swollen areas of skin	Around a cut, scrape or skin breach
Insect bite	Red and/or itchy bumps on the skin	Anywhere and can be sprinked randomly
Allergic reaction	Irregular, raised or flat red sores that appeared after taking medicine/drugs or eating certain foods	Anywhere
Hives	Bumps formed suddenly	Anywhere but usually first noticed on face
Seborrheic dermatitis	Bumps and swelling	Near glands
Cradle Cap	Dry, scaly skin	Scalp of recently born babies
Irritant contact dermatitis	Red, itchy, scaly, or oily rash	Eyebrows, nose, edge of the scalp, point of contact with jewellery, perfume, or clothing.
Allergic Contact Dermatitis caused by poison ivy, poison oak, sumac, or Balsam of Peru[3]	Red, itchy, scaly or oily rash; can also be weeping or leathery.	Anywhere that came in contact with the irritant either directly or via transfer (e.g. from contaminated clothing.)
Allergic purpura	Small red dots on the skin, or larger, bruise-like spots that appeared after taking medicine	Anywhere
Pityriasis Rosea	Started with a single scaly, red and slightly itchy spot, and within a few days, did large numbers of smaller patches of the rash, some red and/or others tan	Chest and abdomen
Dermatitis herpetiformis	Intensely itchy rash with red bumps and blisters	Elbows, knees, back or buttocks
Erythema nodosum	Large red bumps that seem to bruise and are tender to touch	Anywhere
Psoriasis	White, scaly rash over red, flaky, irritated skin	Elbows and knees
Erythema multiforme	Red, blotchy rash, with "target like" hives or sores.	Anywhere
Measles	Red rash that is raised with a fever or sore throat.	Usually starts first on the forehead and face and spreads downward.
Chickenpox	Multiple blisters with a fever, cough, aches, tiredness and sore throat.	Usually starts first on the face, chest and back and spreads downward.
Shingles	Red blisters that are very painful and may crust	Anywhere
Fifth Disease	Started as a fever and then developed a bright red rash	Cheeks
Warts	Soft bumps forming that don't itch and have no other symptoms	Anywhere
Ringworm	Bald spot on the scalp or a ring of itchy red skin	Anywhere
Syphilis	Rash that is red but not itchy	Palms of hands or soles of feet
Jock itch, yeast infection or diaper rash	Red itchy rash	Groin
Tinea versicolor	Light coloured patches	Anywhere
Impetigo	Crusted, tan-colored sores	Near nose or lip
Scabies	Bite-like sores that itch and spread intensely	Usually start on hands or feet and spread everywhere
Rocky Mountain spotted fever	A fine rash with a fever and headache	Usually start on arms and legs including the hands and feet
Lupus erythematosus	A butterfly rash with achy joints	Forehead and cheeks
Jaundice or sign of hepatitis	Yellowish	Skin, whites of eyes and mouth
Bruise	Blue or black area after being hit	Anywhere
Actinic keratoses	Scaly, pink, gray or tan patches or bumps	Face, scalp or on the backs or the hands
Keloid or hypertrophic scar	Scar that has grown larger than expected	Anywhere
Lipoma	Soft or rubbery growth	Anywhere
Milia	Lots of white spots	On the face of a baby
Molluscum or contagiosum	Small, firm, round bumps with pits in the center that may sit on tiny stalks	Anywhere
Scarlet fever	Becomes confluent and forms bright red lines in the skin creases of the neck, armpits and groins (Pastia's lines)	Face, chest & back, whole body, armpits, inside elbows, groins
Sebaceous cyst	Bump with a white dome under the skin	Scalp, nape of the neck or upper back
Skin tag	Soft, fleshy growth, lump or bump	Face, neck, armpits or groin
Xanthelasma	Yellow area under the skin	Under eyelids
Melanoma	Dark bump that may have started within a mole or blemish, or, a spot or mole that has changed in color, size, shape or is painful or itchy	Anywhere
Basal cell carcinoma	Fleshy, growing mass	Areas exposed to the sun
Squamous cell carcinoma	Unusual growth that is red, scaly or crusted	Face, lip or chin
Kaposi's sarcoma	Dark or black raised spots on the skin that keep growing or have appeared recently	Anywhere
Erythema annulare centrifugum (EAC)	Pink-red ring or bullseye marks	Anywhere
Diagnostic approach

Patch test
The causes of a rash are numerous, which may make the evaluation of a rash extremely difficult. An accurate evaluation by a provider may only be made in the context of a thorough history (What medication is the patient taking? What is the patient's occupation? Where has the patient been?) and complete physical examination.

Points to note in the examination include:

The appearance: e.g., purpuric (typical of vasculitis and meningococcal disease), fine and like sandpaper (typical of scarlet fever); circular lesions with a central depression are typical of molluscum contagiosum (and in the past, small pox); plaques with silver scales are typical of psoriasis.
The distribution: e.g., the rash of scarlet fever becomes confluent and forms bright red lines in the skin creases of the neck, armpits and groins (Pastia's lines); the vesicles of chicken pox seem to follow the hollows of the body (they are more prominent along the depression of the spine on the back and in the hollows of both shoulder blades); very few rashes affect the palms of the hands and soles of the feet (secondary syphilis, rickettsia or spotted fevers,[4] guttate psoriasis, hand, foot and mouth disease, keratoderma blennorrhagicum);
Symmetry: e.g., herpes zoster usually only affects one side of the body and does not cross the midline.
A patch test may be ordered, for diagnostic purposes.[5]

Treatment
Treatment differs according to what rash a patient has been diagnosed with. Common rashes can be easily remedied using steroid topical creams (such as hydrocortisone) or non-steroidal treatments. Many of the medications are available over the counter in the United States.[6]

The problem with steroid topical creams i.e. hydrocortisone; is their inability to penetrate the skin through absorption and therefore not be effective in clearing up the affected area, thus rendering the hydrocortisone almost completely ineffective in all except the most mild of cases.[7]

A rash indicates an abnormal change in skin color or texture. Rashes are usually caused by skin inflammation, which can have many causes.

There are many types of rashes, including eczema, granuloma annulare, lichen planus, and pityriasis rosea.

Eczema and Your Skin
Eczema is a general term that describes several different conditions in which skin is inflamed, red, scaly, and itchy. Eczema is a common skin condition, and atopic dermatitis (also called atopic eczema) is one of the most common forms of eczema.

Eczema can occur in adults or children. The condition is not contagious.

What Causes Atopic Eczema?
The cause of atopic eczema is not known, but the condition often affects people with a family history of allergies. Many individuals with eczema also have hay fever and/or asthma or have family members with those conditions.

Some factors can trigger a flare-up of eczema or make eczema worse, but they do not cause the condition. Eczema triggers include stress, skin irritants (including soaps, skin care products, or some fabrics), allergens, and climate/environment.

What Are the Symptoms of Atopic Eczema?
The appearance of eczema can vary from person to person. In adults, eczema occurs most frequently on the hands and elbows, and in "bending" areas such as the inside of the elbows and back of the knees. In young children, eczema is often seen on the elbows, knees, face, neck, and scalp. Signs and symptoms of atopic eczema include:

Itchiness
Skin redness
Dry, scaly, or crusted skin that might become thick and leathery from long-term scratching
Formation of small, fluid-filled blisters that might ooze when scratched
Infection of the areas where the skin has been broken
How Is Atopic Eczema Diagnosed?
Atopic eczema usually is diagnosed with an analysis of a person's history of symptoms and with an exam of the skin. A doctor might test an area of scaly or crusted skin to rule out other skin diseases or infections.

How Is Atopic Eczema Treated?
Atopic eczema can be treated with medications, including over-the-counter creams and ointments containing the steroid hydrocortisone (for example, Cortizone-10, Cort-Aid, Dermarest Eczema, Neosporin Eczema). These products may help control the itching, swelling, and redness associated with eczema. Prescription-strength cortisone creams, as well as cortisone pills and shots, are also used for more severe cases of eczema.

For people with mild-to-moderate eczema, topical immunomodulators (TIMs) can help. TIMS -- including brand name products Protopic and Elidel -- work by altering the body's immune response to allergens, preventing flare ups. However, in 2005, the FDA warned doctors to prescribe Elidel and Protopic with caution due to concerns over a possible cancer risk associated with their use. The two medications have an FDA "black box" warning on their packaging to alert doctors and patients to these potential risks. The warning advises doctors to prescribe short-term use of Elidel and Protopic only after other available eczema treatments have failed in adults and children over the age of 2.

Other drugs that might be used for patients with eczema include antibiotics (to treat infected skin) and antihistamines (to help control itching).

Phototherapy is another treatment that helps some people with eczema. The ultraviolet light waves found in sunlight have been shown to benefit certain skin disorders, including eczema. Phototherapy uses ultraviolet light, either ultraviolet A (UVA) or ultraviolet B (UVB), from special lamps to treat people with severe eczema.

Risks associated with phototherapy include burning (usually resembling a mild sunburn), dry skin, itchy skin, freckling, and possible premature aging of the skin. Your health care professionals will work with you to minimize any risks.

Can Atopic Eczema Be Prevented?
Currently, there is no effective strategy for preventing atopic eczema, but the symptoms of the condition can improve. To improve the signs of eczema:

Reduce stress
Avoid scratchy materials (for example, wool) and chemicals such as harsh soaps, detergents, and solvents
Moisturize frequently
Avoid sudden changes in temperature or humidity
Avoid situations that cause sweating and overheating
Granuloma Annulare and Your Skin
Granuloma annulare is a chronic skin condition that consists of a circular-shaped rash with reddish bumps (papules).

Most often, the condition affects children and young adults. Granuloma annulare is slightly more common in girls and usually is seen in people who are otherwise healthy.

What Causes Granuloma Annulare?
The cause of granuloma annulare is unknown.

What Are the Symptoms of Granuloma Annulare?
People who have granuloma annulare usually notice a ring of small, firm bumps over the backs of the forearms, hands, or feet. More than one ring may be noticed in some cases. The rash may be mildly itchy.

How Is Granuloma Annulare Diagnosed?
The condition is diagnosed by a doctor who may use a skin biopsy to confirm the diagnosis.

How Is Granuloma Annulare Treated?
Treatment of granuloma annulare often is not necessary, except for cosmetic reasons. In some cases, steroid creams or ointments are used to help the bumps disappear. Some doctors may decide to freeze the lesions with liquid nitrogen or to inject steroids directly into the rings of bumps. Ultraviolet light therapy or oral drugs can be used in severe cases.

Lichen Planus and Your Skin
Lichen planus is a common skin disorder that produces shiny, flat-topped bumps that often have an angular shape and a reddish-purplish color. Lichen planus can occur anywhere on the skin but is often found on the insides of the wrists and ankles, the lower legs, the back, and the neck. Some people have lichen planus inside their mouth, genital region, hair, and nails. Thick collections of bumps may occur, especially on the shins.

Lichen planus occurs most often in adults aged 30 to 70. It is not common in very young or elderly people.

What Causes Lichen Planus?
In most cases, the cause of lichen planus is not known. However, lichen planus is linked to hepatitis C infection in some cases.

Medications to treat high blood pressure, heart disease, and arthritis can cause lichen planus-type rashes that are allergic reactions to those drugs. Lichen planus is not contagious.

What Are the Symptoms of Lichen Planus?
Signs and symptoms of the condition include shiny, flat-topped bumps that are purple or a reddish-purplish color. When it appears on the scalp, lichen planus may cause hair loss. Lichen planus of the nails can cause brittle or split nails.

How Is Lichen Planus Diagnosed?
A doctor can diagnose lichen planus by its distinctive appearance or with the use of a skin biopsy. In a skin biopsy, a small bit of skin is taken from the affected area and is sent to a lab for testing.

How Is Lichen Planus Treated?
Although lichen planus cannot be cured, its symptoms can be treated with anti-itch products such as antihistamines (for example, Benadryl, or diphenhydramine). If lichen planus affects only a small part of the body, medicated cream can be applied to the affected area. Drugs such as steroid injections, prednisone, other drugs to suppress the immune system, or retinoids may be prescribed in more severe cases.

Another treatment for lichen planus is light therapy. Talk to your doctor about which treatment is right for you.

Pityriasis Rosea and Your Skin
 Picture of Pityriasis RoseaPityriasis rosea is a common skin rash that usually is mild. The condition often begins with a large, scaly, pink patch of skin on the chest or back. The patch usually is followed by additional pink patches of skin. There is itching and redness or inflammation of the skin. The number and sizes of the spots can vary.

What Causes Pityriasis Rosea?
The cause of pityriasis rosea is not known. However, there is evidence that suggests pityriasis rosea may be caused by a virus because the rash resembles certain viral illnesses. The rash does not seem to spread from person to person.

What Are the Symptoms of Pityriasis Rosea?
The primary symptom of pityriasis rosea is large, scaly, pink area of skin that is followed by additional skin lesions. The spots become itchy and there may be redness or inflammation of the skin. Pityriasis rosea affects the back, neck, chest, abdomen, upper arms, and legs, but the rash may differ from person to person.

How Is Pityriasis Rosea Diagnosed?
A doctor can usually diagnose pityriasis rosea by looking at it. He or she may order blood tests, scrape the skin, or do a skin biopsy to rule out other skin conditions.

How Is Pityriasis Rosea Treated?
Treatment may not be necessary in mild cases of pityriasis rosea, and even more severe cases can go away without treatment. Oral antihistamines (for example Benadryl, or diphenhydramine) can help soothe itching.

Sores may heal faster with some exposure to sunlight or ultraviolet light. Too much sun exposure should be avoided, however. In most cases, pityriasis rosea goes away within six to 12 weeks.

Rash is not a specific diagnosis. Instead it refers to any sort of inflammation and/or discoloration that distorts the skin's normal appearance.
Common rashes include eczema, poison ivy, hives, and athlete's foot.
Infections that cause rashes may be fungal, bacterial, parasitic, or viral.
Over-the-counter products may be helpful treatments for many skin rashes.
Rashes lasting more than a few days that are unexplained should be evaluated by a doctor.

Some common, noninfectious rashes are listed on the following pages. If you have a new rash and you have a fever or some other generalized illness associated with it, it would be best to see your doctor.

Rash Symptoms
Other signs and symptoms that may be associated with rashes include the following:
Blister formation
Scaling
Skin ulceration
Some people may experience the following related rash symptoms and signs:

Skin discoloration
Itching
Bumps on skin

Atopic dermatitis, often called eczema, is a common disorder of childhood that produces red itchy, weeping rashes on the inner aspects of the elbows and in back of the knees as well as the cheeks, neck, wrists, and ankles. It is commonly found in patients who also have asthma and hay fever.



Seborrheic dermatitis is the single most common rash affecting adults. It produces a red scaling often itchy eruption that characteristically affects the scalp, forehead, brows, cheeks, and external ears. In infants, it may involve and scalp (cradle cap) and diaper area.

Contact dermatitis is a rash that is brought on either by contact with a specific chemical to which the patient is uniquely allergic or with a substance that directly irritates the skin. Some chemicals are both irritants and allergens. This rash is tends to be weepy and oozy and affects the parts of the skin which have come in direct contact with the offending substance. Common examples of allergic contact dermatitis are poison ivy, poison sumac, poison oak (same chemical, different plant) and reactions to costume jewelry containing nickel.

Diaper rash
This is a common type of irritant contact dermatitis that occurs in most infants and some adults who wear diapers when feces and urine are in contact with skin for too long.

Stasis dermatitis
This is a weepy, oozy dermatitis that occurs on the lower legs of individuals who have chronic swelling because of poor circulation in veins.
Psoriasis
This bumpy scaling eruption which does not weep or ooze. Psoriasis tends to occur on the scalp, elbows, and knees. The skin condition produces silvery flakes of skin that scale and fall off.

Hives
These red itchy bumps come on in a sudden fashion and then resolve in about eight hours. They tend to recur frequently. If hives are caused by a drug, that drug should be avoided in the future.

Nummular eczema
This is a weepy, oozy dermatitis that tends to occur as coin-shaped plaques in the wintertime and is associated with very dry skin.

Drug eruptions
Certain drugs (like antibiotics) can produce a skin rash as an unwanted side effect. The common appearance is similar to rashes produced by certain common viral infections. On the other hand, drugs may produce a wide variety of other types of rashes.

Heat rash (miliaria)
This skin eruption is caused by the occlusion of sweat ducts during hot, humid weather. It can occur at any age but is most common in infants who are kept too warm. Heat rash looks like a red cluster of acne or small blisters. It is more likely to occur on the neck and upper chest, in the groin, under the breasts, and in elbow creases. Treatment involves moving the individual to a cooler environment.

Rashes not caused by infectious organisms, can be treated with over-the-counter 1% hydrocortisone cream for a week or so prior to seeking medical attention. Over-the-counter oral antihistamines like diphenhydramine (Benadryl) or hydroxyzine (Vistaril, Atarax) can be helpful in controlling the itching sensation.

What health care professionals diagnose and treat rashes?
Dermatologists, pediatricians, infectious diseases specialists, and many internists are capable of identifying most rashes.

The term rash has no precise meaning but often is used to refer to a wide variety of red skin eruptions. A rash is any inflammatory condition of the skin. Dermatologists have developed various terms to describe skin rashes. The first requirement is to identify a primary, most frequent feature. The configuration of the rash is then described using adjectives such as "circular," "ring-shaped," "linear," and "snake-like." Other characteristics of the rash that are noted include density, color, size, consistency, tenderness, shape, and even temperature. Finally, the distribution of the rash on the body can be very useful in diagnosis since many skin diseases have a predilection to appear in certain body areas. Although certain findings may be a very dramatic component of the skin disorder, they may be of limited value in producing an accurate diagnosis. These include findings such as ulcers, scaling, and scabbing. Using this framework, it is often possible to develop a list, called a differential diagnosis, of the possible diseases to be considered. An accurate diagnosis of a skin rash often requires a doctor or other health care professional. On the basis of the differential diagnosis, specific laboratory tests and procedures can be conducted to identify the cause of a particular rash.

Fungal infections are fairly common. Yeasts are botanically related to fungi and can cause skin rashes. These tend to affect folds of skin (like the skin under the breasts or the groin). They look fiery red and have pustules (blisters) around the edges.

Fungus and yeast infections have little to do with hygiene -- clean people get them, as well. Fungal rashes are not commonly acquired from dogs or other animals. They seem to be most easily acquired in gyms, showers, pools, or locker rooms, or from other family members. Many effective antifungal creams can be bought at the drugstore without a prescription, including 1% clotrimazole (Lotrimin, Mycelex) and 1% terbinafine (Lamisil). With extensive infection, or when toenails are involved, a prescription drug may be useful, such as oral terbinafine.

If a fungus has been repeatedly treated without success, it is worthwhile considering the possibility that it was never really a fungus to start with but rather a form of eczema. Eczema is treated entirely differently. A fungal infection can be independently confirmed by performing a variety of simple tests.

The most common bacterial infections of the skin are folliculitis and impetigo. Staph or strep germs may cause folliculitis and/or impetigo, two conditions that are much more common in children than adults. Eruptions caused by bacteria are often pustular (the bumps are topped by pus) or may be plaque-like and quite painful (such as with cellulitis). Rarely, streptococcal sore throat can produce scarlet fever, a rash affecting large areas of skin. Rashes produced by certain classes of bacteria, Rickettsia or spirochetes, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, and secondary syphilis respectively, are often able to be suspected clinically.

Rashes that characteristically occur as part of certain viral infections are called exanthems. Many rashes from viruses are more often symmetrical and affect the skin surface all over the body, including roseola and measles. Sometimes certain viral rashes are localized to the cheeks, such as parvovirus infections (fifth disease). Other viral infections, including herpes or shingles, are mostly localized to one part of the body. Patients with such rashes may or may not have other symptoms like coughing, sneezing, localized burning ,or stomach upset (nausea). Viral rashes usually last a few days to two weeks and resolve on their own.

One of the most common rashes from a parasite infection is scabies. Scabies is produced by a small mite (related to a spider). This mite is usually contracted by contact with another infected individual. The mite lives in the superficial layers of human skin. It does not produce symptoms until the host becomes allergic to it, which occurs about three weeks after the initial infection. It can resemble eczema. Bedbugs cause a series of eruptions where they pierce the skin.



Most rashes are not dangerous. Many rashes last a while and get better on their own. It is therefore not unreasonable to treat symptoms like itchy and/or dry skin for a few days to see whether the condition gets milder and goes away.

Nonprescription (over-the-counter) remedies include the following:

Anti-itch creams containing 1% hydrocortisone cream can be effective
Oral antihistamines like diphenhydramine and hydroxyzine can be helpful in controlling the itching.
Moisturizing lotions
Fungal infections are best treated with topical antifungal medications that contain clotrimazole (Lotrimin), miconazole (Micatin), or terbinafine (Lamisil).

If these measures do not help, or if the rash persists or becomes more widespread, a consultation with a general physician or dermatologist is advisable.

There are many, many other types of rashes that we have not covered in this article. So, it is especially important, if you have any questions about the cause or medical treatment of a rash, to contact your doctor. This article, as the title indicates, is just an introduction to common skin rashes.

A word on smallpox vaccination in patients with rashes
People with atopic dermatitis or eczema should not be vaccinated against smallpox, whether or not the condition is active. Patients with atopic dermatitis are more susceptible to having the virus spread on their skin, which can lead to a serious, even life-threatening condition called eczema vaccinatum. In the case of other rashes, the risk of medical complications is much less. Consult your doctor about the smallpox vaccine.

What is the prognosis for a rash?
The prognosis depends on the cause of the rash. An accurate identification is, therefore, of great importance in predicting its resolution.

Is it possible to prevent rashes?
If the cause of a particular rash is known it can be avoided. For example: a measles vaccination would be of great benefit in preventing the rash of measles, as well more serious consequences of measles infections.


